A stray Lamb stood drinking early one morning on the bank of a
woodland stream. That very same morning a hungry Wolf came by
farther up the stream, hunting for something to eat. He soon got
his eyes on the Lamb. As a rule Mr. Wolf snapped up such
delicious morsels without making any bones about it, but this
Lamb looked so very helpless and innocent that the Wolf felt he
ought to have some kind of an excuse for taking its life.

"How dare you paddle around in my stream and stir up all the
mud!" he shouted fiercely. "You deserve to be punished severely
for your rashness!"

"But, your highness," replied the trembling Lamb, "do not be
angry! I cannot possibly muddy the water you are drinking up
there. Remember, you are upstream and I am downstream."

"You _do_ muddy it!" retorted the Wolf savagely. "And besides, I
have heard that you told lies about me last year!"

"How could I have done so?" pleaded the Lamb. "I wasn't born
until this year."

"If it wasn't you, it was your brother!"

"I have no brothers."

"Well, then," snarled the Wolf, "It was someone in your family
anyway. But no matter who it was, I do not intend to be talked
out of my breakfast."

And without more words the Wolf seized the poor Lamb and carried
her off to the forest.

_The tyrant can always find an excuse for his tyranny._

_The unjust will not listen to the reasoning of the innocent._


111111111111111

A Wolf had been feasting too greedily, and a bone had stuck
crosswise in his throat. He could get it neither up nor down, and
of course he could not eat a thing. Naturally that was an awful
state of affairs for a greedy Wolf.

So away he hurried to the Crane. He was sure that she, with her
long neck and bill, would easily be able to reach the bone and
pull it out.

"I will reward you very handsomely," said the Wolf, "if you pull
that bone out for me."

The Crane, as you can imagine, was very uneasy about putting her
head in a Wolf's throat. But she was grasping in nature, so she
did what the Wolf asked her to do.

[Illustration]

When the Wolf felt that the bone was gone, he started to walk
away.

"But what about my reward!" called the Crane anxiously.

"What!" snarled the Wolf, whirling around. "Haven't you got it?
Isn't it enough that I let you take your head out of my mouth
without snapping it off?"

_Expect no reward for serving the wicked._

11111111111111

A Town Mouse once visited a relative who lived in the country.
For lunch the Country Mouse served wheat stalks, roots, and
acorns, with a dash of cold water for drink. The Town Mouse ate
very sparingly, nibbling a little of this and a little of that,
and by her manner making it very plain that she ate the simple
food only to be polite.

After the meal the friends had a long talk, or rather the Town
Mouse talked about her life in the city while the Country Mouse
listened. They then went to bed in a cozy nest in the hedgerow
and slept in quiet and comfort until morning. In her sleep the
Country Mouse dreamed she was a Town Mouse with all the luxuries
and delights of city life that her friend had described for her.
So the next day when the Town Mouse asked the Country Mouse to go
home with her to the city, she gladly said yes.

When they reached the mansion in which the Town Mouse lived, they
found on the table in the dining room the leavings of a very fine
banquet. There were sweetmeats and jellies, pastries, delicious
cheeses, indeed, the most tempting foods that a Mouse can
imagine. But just as the Country Mouse was about to nibble a
dainty bit of pastry, she heard a Cat mew loudly and scratch at
the door. In great fear the Mice scurried to a hiding place,
where they lay quite still for a long time, hardly daring to
breathe. When at last they ventured back to the feast, the door
opened suddenly and in came the servants to clear the table,
followed by the House Dog.

The Country Mouse stopped in the Town Mouse's den only long
enough to pick up her carpet bag and umbrella.

"You may have luxuries and dainties that I have not," she said as
she hurried away, "but I prefer my plain food and simple life in
the country with the peace and security that go with it."

_Poverty with security is better than plenty in the midst of fear
and uncertainty._

111111111111111


The Fox one day thought of a plan to amuse himself at the expense
of the Stork, at whose odd appearance he was always laughing.

"You must come and dine with me today," he said to the Stork,
smiling to himself at the trick he was going to play. The Stork
gladly accepted the invitation and arrived in good time and with
a very good appetite.

For dinner the Fox served soup. But it was set out in a very
shallow dish, and all the Stork could do was to wet the very tip
of his bill. Not a drop of soup could he get. But the Fox lapped
it up easily, and, to increase the disappointment of the Stork,
made a great show of enjoyment.


The hungry Stork was much displeased at the trick, but he was a
calm, even-tempered fellow and saw no good in flying into a rage.
Instead, not long afterward, he invited the Fox to dine with him
in turn. The Fox arrived promptly at the time that had been set,
and the Stork served a fish dinner that had a very appetizing
smell. But it was served in a tall jar with a very narrow neck.
The Stork could easily get at the food with his long bill, but
all the Fox could do was to lick the outside of the jar, and
sniff at the delicious odor. And when the Fox lost his temper,
the Stork said calmly:

_Do not play tricks on your neighbors unless you can stand the
same treatment yourself._
