A Wolf had been gorging on an animal he had killed, when suddenly a
small bone in the meat stuck in his throat and he could not swallow it.
He soon felt terrible pain in his throat, and ran up and down groaning
and groaning and seeking for something to relieve the pain. He tried to
induce every one he met to remove the bone. “I would give anything,”
said he, “if you would take it out.” At last the Crane agreed to try,
and told the Wolf to lie on his side and open his jaws as wide as he
could. Then the Crane put its long neck down the Wolf’s throat, and
with its beak loosened the bone, till at last it got it out.

“Will you kindly give me the reward you promised?” said the Crane.

The Wolf grinned and showed his teeth and said: “Be content. You have
put your head inside a Wolf’s mouth and taken it out again in safety;
that ought to be reward enough for you.”

Gratitude and greed go not together.


2222222222222222222222


At one time the Fox and the Stork were on visiting terms and seemed
very good friends. So the Fox invited the Stork to dinner, and for a
joke put nothing before her but some soup in a very shallow dish. This
the Fox could easily lap up, but the Stork could only wet the end of
her long bill in it, and left the meal as hungry as when she began. “I
am sorry,” said the Fox, “the soup is not to your liking.”

“Pray do not apologise,” said the Stork. “I hope you will return this
visit, and come and dine with me soon.” So a day was appointed when the
Fox should visit the Stork; but when they were seated at table all that
was for their dinner was contained in a very long-necked jar with a
narrow mouth, in which the Fox could not insert his snout, so all he
could manage to do was to lick the outside of the jar.

“I will not apologise for the dinner,” said the Stork:

“One bad turn deserves another.”



22222222222222222

A Man had lost his way in a wood one bitter winter’s night. As he was
roaming about, a Satyr came up to him, and finding that he had lost his
way, promised to give him a lodging for the night, and guide him out of
the forest in the morning. As he went along to the Satyr’s cell, the
Man raised both his hands to his mouth and kept on blowing at them.
“What do you do that for?” said the Satyr.

“My hands are numb with the cold,” said the Man, “and my breath warms
them.”

After this they arrived at the Satyr’s home, and soon the Satyr put a
smoking dish of porridge before him. But when the Man raised his spoon
to his mouth he began blowing upon it. “And what do you do that for?”
said the Satyr.

“The porridge is too hot, and my breath will cool it.”

“Out you go,” said the Satyr. “I will have nought to do with a man who
can blow hot and cold with the same breath.”

22222222222222

Once upon a time a Wolf was lapping at a spring on a hillside, when,
looking up, what should he see but a Lamb just beginning to drink a
little lower down. “There’s my supper,” thought he, “if only I can find
some excuse to seize it.” Then he called out to the Lamb, “How dare you
muddle the water from which I am drinking?”

“Nay, master, nay,” said Lambikin; “if the water be muddy up there, I
cannot be the cause of it, for it runs down from you to me.”

“Well, then,” said the Wolf, “why did you call me bad names this time
last year?”

“That cannot be,” said the Lamb; “I am only six months old.”

“I don’t care,” snarled the Wolf; “if it was not you it was your
father;” and with that he rushed upon the poor little Lamb and

WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA


ate her all up. But before she died she gasped out—

“Any excuse will serve a tyrant.”

22222222222222222


