I

HOW OLIVER CAME TO LONDON AND WHAT HE FOUND THERE

Oliver Twist was the son of a poor lady who was found lying in the
street one day in an English village, almost starved and very ill. She
had walked a long way, for her shoes were worn to pieces, but where she
came from or where she was going nobody knew. As she had no money, she
was taken to the poorhouse, where she died the next day without even
telling her name, leaving behind her only a gold locket, which was
around her neck, and a baby.

The locket fell into the hands of the mistress of the poorhouse, who was
named Mrs. Bumble. It contained the dead mother's wedding-ring, and, as
Mrs. Bumble was a dishonest woman, she hid both locket and ring,
intending sometime to sell them.

The baby was left, with no one to care for it, to grow up at the
poorhouse with the other wretched orphan children, who wore calico
dresses all alike and had little to eat and many whippings.

Mr. Bumble, the master of the poorhouse, was a pompous, self-important
bully who browbeat every one weaker than himself and scolded and cuffed
the paupers to his heart's content. It was he who named the baby "Oliver
Twist." He used to name all the babies as they came along, by the
letters of the alphabet. The one before Oliver was named Swubble; then
came Oliver with a T; the next would be Unwin, the next Vilkins, and so
on down to Z. Then he would begin the alphabet all over again.

Little Oliver, the baby, grew without any idea of who he was. When he
was a year old he was sent to the poor-farm where an old woman took care
of orphan children for a very small sum apiece each week. This money,
which was paid by the town, was hardly enough to buy them food, but
nevertheless the old woman took good care to save the bigger share for
herself.

He lived there till he was a pale, handsome boy of nine years, and then
he was taken to the workhouse, where, with many other boys of his own
age or older, he had to work hard all day picking oakum.

The boys had nothing but thin gruel for their meals, with an onion twice
a week and half a roll on Sundays. They ate in a great stone hall, in
one end of which stood the big copper of gruel which Mr. Bumble ladled
out. Each boy got only one helping, and the bowls never needed washing,
because, when the meal was through, there was not a drop of gruel left
in them. After each meal they all sat staring at the copper and sucking
their fingers, but nobody dared ask for more.

One day they felt so terribly hungry that one of the biggest boys said
unless he got another helping of gruel he was afraid he would have to
eat the boy who slept next him. The little boys all believed this and
cast lots to see who should ask for more. It fell to Oliver Twist.

So that night after supper, though he was dreadfully frightened, Oliver
rose and went up to the end of the room and said to Mr. Bumble, "Please,
sir, I want some more."

Mr. Bumble was so surprised he turned pale. "What!" he gasped.

"Please, sir," said Oliver again, "I want some more."

Mr. Bumble picked up the ladle and struck Oliver on the head with it;
then he pounced on him and shook him. When he was tired shaking him, he
dragged him away and shut him up in a dark room, where he stayed a whole
week, and was only taken out once a day to be whipped. Then, to make an
example of him, a notice was pasted on the gate of the workhouse
offering a reward to anybody who would take poor Oliver away and do what
he liked with him.

The first one who came by was a middle-aged chimney-sweep, who wanted a
boy to climb up the insides of chimneys and clean out the soot. This was
a dangerous thing to do, for sometimes the boys who did it got burned
or choked with the smoke, and when Oliver found what they were going to
do with him and looked at the man's cruel face, he burst out crying, so
that a kind-hearted magistrate interfered and would not let the
chimney-sweep have him.

Mr. Bumble finally gave him to the village undertaker, and there he had
to mind the shop and do all the chores. He slept under the counter among
piles of empty coffins. The undertaker's wife beat him often, and
whenever he was not at work he had to attend funerals, which was by no
means amusing, so that he found life no better than it had been at the
workhouse. The undertaker had an apprentice, too, who kicked him
whenever he came near.

All this wretchedness Oliver bore as well as he could, without
complaining. But one day the cowardly apprentice began to say unkind
things of Oliver's dead mother, and this he could not stand. His anger
made him stronger even than his tormentor, though the latter was more
than a head taller and much older, and he sprang upon him, caught him by
the throat and, after shaking him till his teeth rattled, knocked him
flat on the floor.

The big bully screamed for help and cried that he was being murdered, so
that the undertaker and his wife came running in. Oliver told them what
the apprentice had said, but that made no difference. The undertaker
sent for Mr. Bumble, and between them they flogged him till he could
hardly stand and sent him to bed without anything to eat.

Till then Oliver had not shed a tear, but now, alone in the dark, he
felt so miserable that he cried for a long time.

There was nothing to do, he thought at last, but to run away. So he tied
up his few belongings in a handkerchief and, waiting till the first beam
of sunrise, he unbarred the door and ran away as fast as he could,
through the town into the country.

He hid behind hedges whenever he saw anybody, for fear the undertaker or
Mr. Bumble were after him, and before long he found a road that he knew
led to London. Oliver had never seen a city, but he thought where there
were so many people there would certainly be something for a boy to do
to earn his living, so he trudged stoutly on and before nightfall had
walked twenty miles. He begged a crust of bread at a cottage and slept
under a hayrick. The next day and night he was so very hungry and cold
that when morning came again he could scarcely walk at all.

He sat down finally at the edge of a village, wondering whether he was
going to die, when he saw coming along the queerest-looking boy. He was
about Oliver's age, with a snub nose, bow legs and little sharp eyes.
His face was very dirty and he wore a man's coat, whose ragged tails
came to his heels.

The boy saw Oliver's plight and asked him what the matter was, mixing
his words with such a lot of strange slang that Oliver could hardly
understand him. When Oliver explained that he had been walking a number
of days and was very hungry, the other took him to a shop near by,
bought him some bread and ham, and watched him eat it with great
attention, asking him many questions--whether he had any money or knew
any place in London where he could stay. Oliver answered no.

"Don't fret about that," said the other. "I know a 'spectable old
genelman as lives there wot'll give you lodgings for nothing if I
interduce you."

Oliver did not think his new host looked very respectable himself, but
he thought it might be as well for him to know the old gentleman,
particularly as he had nowhere else to go. So they set off.

It was night when they reached London, and it was so big and crowded
that Oliver kept close to his guide. He noticed, however, that the
streets they passed through were narrow and dirty and the houses old and
hideously filthy. The people, too, seemed low and wretched.

He was just wondering if he had not better run away when the boy pushed
open a door, drew Oliver inside, up a broken stairway and into a back
room.

Here, frying some sausages over a stove, was a shriveled old Jew in a
greasy flannel gown. He was very ugly and his matted red hair hung down
over his villainous face. In a corner stood a clothes-horse on which
hung hundreds of silk handkerchiefs, and four or five boys, as dirty and
oddly dressed as the one who had brought Oliver, sat about a table
smoking pipes like rough, grown men.

Oliver's guide introduced him to the Jew, whose name was Fagin, and the
boys crowded around him, putting their hands into his pockets, which he
thought a queer joke. Fagin grinned horribly as he shook hands with him
and told him he was very welcome, which did not tend to reassure him,
and then the sausages were passed around. The Jew gave Oliver a glass of
something to drink, and as soon as he drank it he became very sleepy and
knew nothing more till the following morning.

The next few days Oliver saw much to wonder at. When he woke up, Fagin
was sorting over a great box full of watches, which he hid away when he
saw Oliver was looking. Every day the boy who had brought him there,
whom they called "the Artful Dodger," came in and gave the Jew some
pocketbooks and handkerchiefs. Oliver thought he must have made the
pocketbooks, only they did not look new, and some seemed to have money
in them. He noticed, too, that whenever the Artful Dodger came home
empty-handed Fagin seemed angry and cuffed and kicked him and sent him
to bed supperless; but when he brought home a good number everything was
very jolly.

Whenever there was nothing else to do, the old Jew played a very curious
game with the boys. This was the way they played it:

Fagin would put a snuff-box in one pocket, a watch in another and a
handkerchief in a third; then he would walk about the room just as any
old gentleman would walk about the street, stopping now and then, as if
he were looking into shop-windows. All the time the boys followed him
closely, sometimes treading on his toes or stumbling against him, and
when this happened one of them would slip a hand into his pocket and
take out either the watch or the snuff-box or the handkerchief. If the
Jew felt a hand in his pocket he cried out which it was, and then the
game began all over again. At last Fagin made Oliver try if he could
take something out of his pocket without his knowing it, and when Oliver
succeeded he patted his head and seemed well pleased.

But Oliver grew very tired of the dirty room and the same game. He
longed for the open air and begged to be allowed to go out; so one day
the Jew put him in charge of the Artful Dodger and they went upon the
streets, Oliver wondering where in the world he was going to be taught
to make pocketbooks.

He was on the point of asking, when the Artful Dodger signed to him to
be silent, and slunk behind an old gentleman who was reading a book in
front of a book-stall. You can imagine Oliver's horror when he saw him
thrust his hand into the old gentleman's pocket, draw out a silk
handkerchief and run off at full speed.

In an instant Oliver understood the mystery of the handkerchiefs, the
watches, the purses and the curious game he had learned at Fagin's. He
knew then that the Artful Dodger was a pickpocket. He was so frightened
that for a minute he lost his wits and ran off as fast as he could go.

Just then the old gentleman found his handkerchief was gone and, seeing
Oliver running away, shouted "Stop thief!" which frightened the poor boy
even more and made him run all the faster. Everybody joined the chase,
and before he had gone far a burly fellow overtook Oliver and knocked
him down.

A policeman was at hand and he was dragged, more dead than alive, to the
police court, followed by the angry old gentleman.

The moment the latter saw the boy's face, however, he could not believe
it was the face of a thief, and refused to appear against him, but the
magistrate was in a bad humor and was about to sentence Oliver to
prison, anyway, when the owner of the book-stall came hurrying in. He
had seen the theft and knew Oliver was not guilty, so the magistrate was
obliged to let him go.

But the terror and the blow he had received had been too much for
Oliver. He fell down in a faint, and the old gentleman, whose name was
Mr. Brownlow, overcome with pity, put him into a coach and drove him to
his own home, determined, if the boy had no parents, to adopt him as his
own son.


II

OLIVER'S ADVENTURES

While Oliver was resting in such good hands, very strange things were
occurring in the house of Fagin. When the Artful Dodger told him of the
arrest the Jew was full of anger. He had intended to make a clever thief
of Oliver and compel him to bring him many stolen things; now he had not
only failed in this and lost the boy's help, but he was also afraid that
Oliver would tell all about the wicked practices he had seen and show
the officers where he had lived. This he thought was likely to happen at
any time, unless he could get the boy into his power again.

Something had occurred, too, meantime, that made Fagin almost crazy with
rage at losing him. It was this: A wicked man--so wicked that he was
afraid of thunder--who went by the name of Monks, had come to him and
told him he would pay a large sum of money if he could succeed in making
Oliver a thief and so ruin his reputation and his good name.

It was plain enough that for some reason the man hated Oliver, but,
cunning as Fagin was, he would never have guessed why. For Monks was
really Oliver's older half-brother!

A little while before this story began, Oliver's father had been obliged
to go on a trip to a foreign country, where he died very suddenly. But
before he died he made a will, in which he left all his fortune to be
divided between the baby Oliver and his mother. He left only a small sum
to his older son, because he knew that he was wicked, and did not
deserve any. The will declared Oliver should have the money only on
condition that he never stain his name with any act of meanness,
dishonor, cowardice or wrong. If he did do this, then half the money was
to go to the older son. The dying man also wrote a letter to Oliver's
mother, telling her that he had made the will and that he was dying; but
the older son, who was with him when he died, found the letter and
destroyed it.

So Oliver's poor mother, knowing nothing of all this, when his father
did not come back, thought at last that he had deserted her, and in her
shame stole away from her home, poor and ill-clad, to die finally in the
poorhouse.

The older brother, who had taken the name of Monks, hunted and hunted
for them, because he hated Oliver on account of their father's will, and
wanted to do him all the harm he could. He discovered that they had been
taken into the poorhouse, and went there, but this was after Oliver had
run away. He found, however, to his satisfaction, that the boy knew
nothing about his parentage or his real name, and Monks made up his mind
to prevent his ever learning.

There was only one person who could have told Oliver, and that one was
Mrs. Bumble. She knew through the locket she had kept, which had
belonged to Oliver's mother and which contained the dead woman's
wedding-ring with her name engraved inside it. When Mrs. Bumble heard
that a man named Monks was searching for news of Oliver, she thought it
a capital chance to make some money. She went, therefore, to Monks's
house and sold the locket and ring to him. These, Monks thought, were
the only proofs in the world that could ever show Oliver who he was, and
to make it impossible for him ever to see them, he dropped them through
a trap-door in his house down into the river, where they could never be
found.

But Monks did not give up searching for Oliver, and at last, on the very
day that Oliver was arrested, he saw him coming from Fagin's house with
the Artful Dodger.

From his wonderful resemblance to their dead father, he guessed at once
that Oliver was the half-brother whose very name he hated. Knowing the
other now to be in London, Monks was afraid that by some accident he
might yet find out what a fortune had been willed him. If he could only
make Oliver dishonest, Monks reflected, half their father's fortune
would become his own. With this thought in mind he had gone to Fagin
and had made him his offer of money to make the boy a thief.

Fagin, of course, had agreed, and now, to find his victim was out of his
power made the Jew grind his teeth with rage.

All these things made Fagin determined to gain possession of Oliver
again, and to do this he got the help of two others--a young woman named
Nancy and her lover, a brutal robber named Bill Sikes. These two
discovered that Oliver was at Mr. Brownlow's house, and lay in wait to
kidnap him if he ever came out.

The chance they waited for occurred before many days. Mr. Brownlow sent
Oliver to take some money to the very book-stall in front of which the
Artful Dodger had stolen the handkerchief, and Oliver went without
dreaming of any danger.

Suddenly a young woman in a cap and apron screamed out behind him very
loudly: "Oh, my dear little brother!" and threw her arms tight around
him. "Oh, my gracious, I've found him!" she cried. "Come home directly,
you naughty boy! For shame, to treat your poor mother so!"

Oliver struggled, but to no purpose. Nancy (for it was she) told the
people that crowded about them that it was her little brother, who had
run away from home and nearly broken his mother's heart, and that she
wanted to take him back.

Oliver insisted that he didn't know her at all and hadn't any sister,
but just then Bill Sikes appeared (as he had planned) and said the young
woman was telling the truth and that Oliver was a little rascal and a
liar. The people were all convinced at this, and when Sikes struck
Oliver and seized him by the collar they said, "Serves him right!" And
so Oliver found himself dragged away from Mr. Brownlow to the filthy
house where lived Fagin.

The wily old Jew was overjoyed to see them. He smiled such a fiendish
smile that Oliver screamed for help as loud as he could, and at this
Fagin picked up a great jagged club to beat him with.

Now, Nancy had been very wicked all her life, but in spite of this there
was a little good in her. She had already begun to repent having helped
steal the boy, and now his plight touched her heart. She seized the club
and threw it into the fire, and so saved him the beating for that time.

For many days Oliver was kept a prisoner. He was free to wander about
the mildewed old house, but every outer door was locked and every window
had closed iron shutters. All the light came in through small round
holes at the top, which made the rooms gloomy and full of shadows.
Spiderwebs were over all the walls, and often the mice would go
scampering across the floor. There was only one window to look out of,
and that was in a back garret, but it had iron bars and looked out only
on to the housetops.

He found only one book to read: this was a history of the lives of great
criminals and was full of stories of secret thefts and murders. For the
old Jew, having tortured his mind by loneliness and gloom, had left the
volume in his way, hoping it would instil into his soul the poison that
would blacken it for ever.

But Oliver's blood ran cold as he read, and he pushed the book away in
horror, and, falling on his knees, prayed that he might be spared from
such deeds and rescued from that terrible place.

He was still on his knees when Nancy came in and told him he must get
ready at once to go on a journey with Bill Sikes. She had been crying
and her face was bruised as though she had been beaten. Oliver saw she
was very sorry for him, and, indeed, she told him she would help him if
she could, but that there was no use trying to escape now, because they
were watched all the time, and if he got away Sikes would certainly kill
her.

Nancy took him to the house where Sikes lived, and the next morning the
latter started out, making Oliver go with him. Sikes had a loaded pistol
in his overcoat pocket, and he showed this to Oliver and told him if he
spoke to anybody on the road or tried to get away he would shoot him
with it.

They walked a long way out of London, once or twice riding in carts
which were going in their direction. Whenever this happened Sikes kept
his hand in the pocket where the pistol was, so that Oliver was afraid
to appeal for help. Late at night they came to an old deserted mansion
in the country, and in the basement of this, where a fire had been
kindled, they joined two other men whom Oliver had seen more than once
in Fagin's house in London.

The journey had been cold and long and Oliver was very hungry, but he
could scarcely eat the supper that was given him for fear of what they
intended to do with him in that lonely spot. He was so tired, however,
that he finally went fast asleep and knew nothing more till two o'clock
in the morning, when Sikes woke him roughly and bade him come with them.

It was foggy and cold and dark outside. Sikes and one of the others each
took one of Oliver's hands, and so they walked a quarter of a mile to
where was a fine house with a high wall around it. They made him climb
over the wall with them, and, pulling him along, crept toward the house.

It was not till now that Oliver knew what they intended--that they were
going to rob the house and make him help them, so that he, too, would be
a burglar. His limbs began to tremble and he sank to his knees, begging
them to have mercy and to let him run away and die in the fields rather
than to make him steal. But Sikes drew his pistol with a frightful oath
and dragged him on.

In the back of the house was a window, which was not fastened, because
it was much too small for a man to get through. But Oliver was so
little that he could do it easily. With the pistol in his hand, Sikes
put Oliver through the window, gave him a lantern and bade him go and
unlock the front door for them.

[Illustration: "The Artful Dodger" introducing Oliver Twist to Fagin

_See page 55_]

Oliver had made up his mind that as soon as he got beyond the range of
Sikes's pistol he would scream and wake everybody in the house, but just
then there was a sound from inside, and Sikes called to him to come
back.

Suddenly there was a loud shout from the top of the stairs--a flash--a
report--and Oliver staggered back with a terrible pain in his arm and
with everything swimming before his eyes.

He heard cries and the loud ringing of a bell and felt Sikes drag him
backward through the window. He felt himself being carried along
rapidly, and then a cold sensation crept over his heart and he knew no
more.


III

HOW EVERYTHING TURNED OUT RIGHT FOR OLIVER IN THE END

After a long, long time Oliver came to himself. The morning was
breaking. He tried to rise and found that his arm was wounded and his
clothes wet with blood.

He was so dizzy he could hardly stand, but it was freezing cold, and he
knew if he stayed there he must die. So he staggered on till he came to
a road where, a little way off, he saw a house. There, he thought, he
might get help. But when he came closer he saw that it was the very
house the men had tried to rob that night. Fear came over him then, and
he would have run away, but he was too weak.

He had just strength left to push open the gate, totter across the lawn
and knock at the door; then he sank in a faint on the steps.

In the house lived a lady named Mrs. Maylie, just as kind-hearted as was
Mr. Brownlow who had rescued Oliver at the police station, and with her
lived a beautiful girl whom she had adopted, named Rose. The servants,
when they came to the door, made sure Oliver was one of the robbers, and
sent at once for policemen to take him in charge; but Miss Rose, the
moment she saw what a good face the boy had and how little he looked
like a thief, made them put him to bed and send at once for the doctor.

When the good doctor arrived and saw Oliver, who was still unconscious,
he thought Miss Rose was right, and when the boy had come to himself and
told them how he had suffered, he was certain of it. They were both
sorry the policemen had been sent for, because the doctor was sure they
would not believe Oliver's story, especially as he had been arrested
once before. He would have taken him away, but he was too sick to be
moved.

So when the officers came the doctor told them that the boy had been
accidentally shot and had come to the house for assistance, when the
servants had mistaken him for one of the burglars. This was not exactly
the truth, but it seemed necessary to deceive the policemen if Oliver
was to be saved. Of course, the servant that had fired the pistol was
not able to swear that he had hit anybody at all, so the officers had to
go away without arresting anybody.

After this Oliver was ill for a long time, but he was carefully nursed,
especially by Miss Rose, who grew as fond of him as if she had been his
sister. As soon as he grew better she wrote a letter for him to Mr.
Brownlow, the old gentleman who had rescued him from the police station,
but to Oliver's grief she found that he had gone to the West Indies.

Thus the time passed till Oliver was quite well, and then Miss Rose
(first carefully instructing the servant who went with them not to lose
sight of him for a moment for fear of his old enemies) took him with her
for a visit to London.

Meantime there had been a dreadful scene in Fagin's house when Bill
Sikes got back to London and told the old Jew that the robbery had
failed and that Oliver was lost again. They were more afraid than ever
that they would be caught and sent to prison. Fagin swore at Sikes, and
Monks cursed Fagin, and between them all they determined that Oliver
must either be captured or killed.

While they were plotting afresh Nancy, who had been feeling sorrier and
sorrier for what she had done, overheard them, and so found out that
Monks was Oliver's half-brother and why he so hated him; and she made up
her mind to save the boy from his last and greatest danger.

So one evening, when she was alone with him, she gave Sikes some
laudanum in a glass of liquor, and when he was asleep she slipped away,
found Miss Rose and told her all about it. Bad as Nancy was, however,
she was not willing to betray Fagin or Bill Sikes, so she only told her
of Monks.

Miss Rose was greatly astonished, for she had never heard of him before,
but she pitied Nancy because she had tried to help Oliver, and, of
course, she herself wanted very much to help him discover who he was and
who his parents had been. She thanked Nancy and begged her to come to
see her again. Nancy was afraid to do this, because Bill Sikes watched
her so closely, but she promised that on the next Sunday at midnight she
would be on a certain bridge where Miss Rose might see her. Then Nancy
hurried back before Sikes should wake up.

Miss Rose was in trouble now, for there was no one in London with her
then who could help her. But the same afternoon, whom should Oliver see
at a distance, walking into his house, but Mr. Brownlow. He came back in
great joy to tell Miss Rose, and she concluded that the old gentleman
would be the very one to aid her. She took Oliver to the house, and,
sure enough, there was the boy's old benefactor.

Very glad, indeed, he was to hear what she told him. For the old
gentleman, when Oliver had disappeared with the money he had given him
to take to the bookseller, had been reluctant to think the boy he had
befriended was, after all, a liar and a thief. He had advertised for
him, but the only result had been a call from Mr. Bumble, who told him
terrible tales of Oliver's wickedness. To find now, after all this time,
that Oliver had not run away, and that Mr. Bumble's tales were lying
ones, was a joyful surprise to Mr. Brownlow.

After he had heard the whole, and when Oliver had gone into the garden,
Miss Rose told him of Nancy's visit and of the man Monks who still
pursued the boy to do him harm.

It was fortunate that she had come to Mr. Brownlow, for, as it happened,
he knew a great deal about Monks and his evil life. Years before the old
gentleman himself had been a friend of Oliver's father. He knew all
about his death in a foreign country, and had watched his older son's
career of shame with sorrow. The very trip he had made to the West
Indies had acquainted him with a crime Monks had committed there, from
which he had fled to England. But, while Mr. Brownlow knew of the
curious will Oliver's father had made, what had become of the baby to
which the latter referred he had never known. Now, from the story Miss
Rose told him, he was assured that Oliver was, indeed, this baby
half-brother of Monks.

But it was one thing to know this and quite another to enable Oliver to
prove it. The old gentleman was quick to see that they must get
possession of Monks and frighten him into confessing the fact--whose
only proofs had been lost when he threw the locket and ring into the
river. Mr. Brownlow, for this reason, agreed with Miss Rose that they
should both meet Nancy on the bridge on the coming Sunday to hear all
she had been able to find out.

They said not a word of this to Oliver, and when Sunday night came they
drove to the spot where Nancy had promised to meet them. She had kept
her word. She was there before them, and Mr. Brownlow heard her story
over again from her own lips.

But some one else was there, too, hidden behind a pillar, where he could
hear every word she said, and this listener was a spy of Fagin's.

Nancy had cried so much and acted so strangely that the old Jew had
grown suspicious and had set some one to watch her. And who do you
suppose this spy was? No other than the cowardly apprentice who had
bullied Oliver until he ran away from the undertaker's house. The
apprentice had finally run away, too, had come to London and begun a
wicked life. He was too big a coward to rob any one but little children
who had been sent to the shop to buy something, so Fagin had given him
spying work to do, and in this, being by nature a sneak, he proved very
successful.

The spy lay hid till he had heard all Nancy said; then he slipped out
and ran as fast as his legs would carry him back to Fagin. The latter
sent for Bill Sikes, knowing him to be the most brutal and bloodthirsty
ruffian of all, and told him what Nancy had done.

The knowledge, as the Jew expected, turned Sikes into a demon. He rushed
to where Nancy lived. She had returned and was asleep on her couch, but
she woke as he entered, and saw by his face that he meant to murder her.
Through all her evil career Nancy had been true to Sikes and would not
have betrayed him. But he would not listen now, though she pleaded with
him pitifully to come with her to some foreign country (as Miss Rose had
begged her to do), where they might both lead better lives. Fury had
made him mad. As she clung to his knees, he seized a heavy club and
struck her down.

So poor Nancy died, with only time for a feeble prayer to God for mercy.

Of all bad deeds that Sikes had ever done, that was the worst. The sun
shone through the window and lit the room where Nancy lay. He tried to
shut it out, but he could not. He grew suddenly afraid. Horror came
upon him. He crept out of the room, locked the door behind him, and
plunged into the crowded street.

He walked for miles and miles, here and there, without purpose.
Whichever way he went he could not rid himself of that horror. When
night came he crawled into a disused shed, but he could not sleep.
Whenever he closed his eyes he seemed to see Nancy's eyes looking at
him. He got up and wandered on again, desperately lonely for some one to
talk to.

He heard a man telling another about the murder as he read the account
in a newspaper, and knew that he must hide. He hastened then to a den he
knew in a house beside the river, dirty and dismal and the haunt of
thieves. Some of his old companions were there, but even they shrank
from him.

He had been seen to enter the place, however, and in a few minutes the
street was full of people, all yelling for his capture. He barred the
doors and windows, but they began to break down the shutters with
sledge-hammers.

He ran to the roof with a rope, thinking to let himself down on the side
next the river and so escape. Here he fastened one end of the rope to
the chimney, and, making a loop in the other end, put it over his head.

Just at that instant he imagined he saw Nancy's eyes again looking at
him. He staggered back in terror, missed his footing, and fell over the
edge of the roof. He had not had time to draw the noose down under his
arms, so that it slipped up around his neck, and there he hung, dead,
with a broken neck.

Meanwhile Mr. Brownlow had acted very quickly, so that Monks had got no
warning. He had had men watching for the latter and now, having found
out all he wanted to know, he had him seized in the street, put into a
coach and driven to his office, where he brought him face to face with
Oliver.

The old gentleman told Monks he could do one of two things: either he
could confess before witnesses the whole infamous plot he had framed
against Oliver, and so restore to him his rights and name, or else he
could refuse, in which case he would at once be arrested and sent to
prison. Seeing that Mr. Brownlow knew all about the part he had played,
Monks, to save himself, made a full confession--how he had planned to
keep his half-brother from his inheritance. And he also confessed what
no one there had guessed: that Miss Rose, who had been adopted in her
infancy, was really the sister of Oliver's dead mother--his aunt,
indeed. This was the happiest of all Oliver's surprises that day, for he
had learned to love Miss Rose very dearly.

Monks thus bought his own freedom, and cheap enough he probably thought
it, for before he had finished his story, word came that Fagin the Jew
had been captured by the police and was to be tried without delay for
his life.

Oliver no longer had anything to fear, and came into possession of his
true name and his fortune. Mr. Brownlow adopted him as his own son, and
moved to the village where Oliver had been cared for in the family of
Miss Rose, and where they all lived happily ever afterward.

The company of thieves was broken up with Fagin's arrest. Fagin himself
was found guilty, and died on the gallows shrieking with fear. Monks
sailed for America, where he was soon detected in crime and died in
prison.

The wicked apprentice, who had been the real cause of poor Nancy's
murder, was so frightened at the fate of Fagin that he reformed and
became a spy for the police, and by his aid the Artful Dodger, who
continued to pick pockets, soon found himself in jail.

As for Mr. and Mrs. Bumble, they, of course, lost their positions, and
sank from bad to worse till they finally became paupers and were sent to
the very same poorhouse where they had tortured little Oliver Twist.